[mkdocs] docs: add create from mnemonic tutorial (#1752)
symbol/symbol: mkdocs/pages/en/devbook/accounts/create-from-mnemonic.md

---
title: Create from Mnemonic
---

# Creating Accounts from Mnemonics

> This tutorial shows how to create <accounts:> for the Symbol blockchain using a <mnemonic phrase:>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to create <accounts:> for the Symbol blockchain using a <mnemonic phrase:>,
also known simply as _mnemonic_.
```

Because the rest of the tutorial just calls it mnemonic.

This approach is commonly used by <HD wallets:> to manage multiple accounts from a single seed.

## Prerequisites

If you have not done so already, start with the [Hello World](../start/hello-world.md) tutorial to make sure your
development environment is set up correctly.

## Full Code

{% import 'tutorial.jinja2' as tutorial with context %}

{{ tutorial.code_full('devbook/accounts/create-from-mnemonic', ['py', 'js']) }}

## Code Explanation

### Initializing the Facade

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:5:6', 'js:5:6']) }}

The <dy:SymbolFacade> provides access to Symbol's cryptographic operations and network utilities.
It is initialized with a network name (`testnet` or `mainnet`) to ensure that network-specific values,

> such as <address:>, are generated correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as <addresses:>, are generated correctly.
```

Works for plurals :)

> such as <address:>, are generated correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as <addresses:>, are generated correctly.
```

Works for English plurals :)

### Defining a Mnemonic

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:8:16', 'js:8:17']) }}

The example checks for an existing mnemonic in the `MNEMONIC` environment variable.
If the variable is set, the mnemonic is loaded from it.
Otherwise, a new random mnemonic is generated using <dy:Bip32.random>.

Symbol uses the [BIP39](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki) standard, which represents
mnemonics as 24 English words selected from a standardized word list.

> These words encode entropy that serves as the foundation for deriving private keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These words encode the entropy (randomness) used to create all derived private keys.
```

!!! warning "Store your mnemonic securely"

>     The mnemonic can be used to regenerate all derived accounts and private keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! warning "Store your mnemonic phrase securely"
    The mnemonic phrase can be used to regenerate all derived accounts and private keys.
```

We can informally use "mnemonic" throughout the tutorial, but for serious matters like this warning box, let's use the full name "mnemonic phrase".

    Anyone with access to it can control your accounts, and losing it means losing access permanently.

    Never share your mnemonic with anyone, and always store it in a secure location.

### Deriving the Root Node

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:18:23', 'js:19:24']) }}

After defining the mnemonic, <dy:Bip32.fromMnemonic> converts the mnemonic and a password into a root node,
which serves as the starting point for deriving child accounts.

The password (sometimes called a "25th word") is an optional string that extends the mnemonic seed.
It can be left empty or set to any value.
When used, it adds another layer of security. Different passwords with the same mnemonic produce completely different
accounts.

!!! note "Password security"
    The password is part of the account derivation.
    Both the mnemonic and password are required to regenerate the accounts.

>     If you lose or forget either one, you lose access to all derived accounts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you lose either one, you lose access to all derived accounts.
```

Mnemonics are not meant to be remembered. I hope!

In this example, the password is loaded from the `PASSWORD` environment variable.

> If not set, the snippet defaults to `correcthorsebatterystaple` for demonstration purposes only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If not set, the snippet uses a default one.
```

Less things to maintain, and it's similar to the rest of tutorials.
I love the geeky reference, though :D

Author: Credits to @gimre-xymcity!

 https://github.com/symbol/symbol/blob/main/docs/index.md#tutorial-creating-an-account

Reviewer: LOL! Always one for geeky easter eggs :)

### Deriving the Child Account

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:25:27', 'js:26:28']) }}

The root node can derive multiple child accounts using a hierarchical path.
This allows a single mnemonic to manage many accounts while keeping them cryptographically isolated.

<dy:SymbolFacade.bip32Path> generates the derivation path for a specific account index.
In this example, the account at index `0` is derived, but you can derive additional accounts by using different
indices (e.g., `1`, `2`, `3`).

<dy:Bip32Node.derivePath> follows the specified path from the root node to produce a child node that represents

> the account.

Reviewer: This explanation is a bit obscure. What are hierarchical paths and derivation paths? So I can derive child nodes from other child nodes and build a tree? Why would I want that?

HOWEVER, I don't think many people care about that, and we already provided a link to the BIP39 standard, so this section is fine by me.

In any case, if we wanted to talk more about this topic, we'd need to do it in the Textbook.

Author: Agreed, it’s one of those topics that can become complex quickly. Keeping it practical makes sense. I edited it to make it clearer and added a brief explanation (in parentheses) for derivation paths. We can remove it later and just add a link if we decide to go deeper in the textbook.

Reviewer: Looks good!

### Creating the Account

{{ tutorial.code_snippet(['py:29:38', 'js:30:39']) }}

Once the child node is derived, it is converted into a usable key pair and address.

1. **Key pair creation:** <dy:SymbolFacade.bip32NodeToKeyPair> extracts the <private key:> and <public key:> from the
   child node.
   The private key must remain secret, while the public key can be safely shared.

2. **Address derivation:** <dy:network.publicKeyToAddress> converts the public key into an <address:>, a shorter,
   human-readable, network-specific identifier for the account.

## Output

The output shown below corresponds to a typical run of the program.

```text
--8<-- 'devbook/accounts/create-from-mnemonic.log'
```

Each time the code runs without environment variables, it generates a different random mnemonic and account.
If the same mnemonic and password are provided, the same account is always derived for the given account index.

## Conclusion

This tutorial showed how to:

| Step                                                       | Related documentation                    |
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |

> | [Define a mnemonic](#defining-a-mnemonic)                  | <dy:Bip32.random>                        |

Reviewer: Rather than defining a mnemonic, it's creating a random new one.

| [Derive a root node](#deriving-the-root-node)              | <dy:Bip32.fromMnemonic>                  |

> | [Derive a child account](#deriving-the-child-account)      | <dy:Bip32Node.derivePath>                |

Reviewer: This table is meant as a quick reference guide, so someone can come back here after a while and quickly remember what they have to do.
So I like to keep details out, like root and child nodes, and make this table more task-oriented.
For this row, you could write something like: "Derive an account from a mnemonic", and provide links to `from_mnemonic`, `bip32_path`, and `derive_path`.

> | [Get the key pair](#creating-the-key-pair-and-address)     | <dy:SymbolFacade.bip32NodeToKeyPair>     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [Get the key pair of the account](#creating-the-account)   | <dy:SymbolFacade.bip32NodeToKeyPair>     |
| [Get the address of the account](#creating-the-account)    | <dy:network.publicKeyToAddress>          |
```

> | [Get the address](#creating-the-key-pair-and-address)      | <dy:network.publicKeyToAddress>          |

Author: Unsure why `<dy>` links for this page are not working in my local preview.

Reviewer: My bad. It's because the class name has numbers. Fixed in `new-docs` now.
